# The Elements of Geology (excerpts)

The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Elements of Geology, by W. H. Norton

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the copyright
laws for your country before distributing this or any other Project Gutenberg
file.

We encourage you to keep this file, exactly as it is, on your own disk, thereby
keeping an electronic path open for future readers. Please do not remove this.

This header should be the first thing seen when anyone starts to view the
etext. Do not change or edit it without written permission. The words are
carefully chosen to provide users with the information they need to understand
what they may and may not do with the etext.

**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

**_These Etexts Are Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!_**

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get etexts, and further
information, is included below. We need your donations.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3) organization
with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541

Title: The Elements of Geology

Author: William Harmon Norton

Release Date: July, 2003 (Etext #4204) (Yes, we are more than one year ahead of
schedule) (This file was first posted on December 01, 2001)

Edition: 10

Language: English

## CHAPTER IV - RIVER DEPOSITS

The characteristic features of river deposits and the forms which they assume
may be treated under three heads: (1) valley deposits, (2) basin deposits, and
(3) deltas.  

### VALLEY DEPOSITS

FLOOD PLAINS are the surfaces of the alluvial deposits which streams build
along their courses at times of flood. A swift current then sweeps along the
channel, while a shallow sheet of water moves slowly over the flood plain,
spreading upon it a thin layer of sediment. It has been estimated that each
inundation of the Nile leaves a layer of fertilizing silt three hundredths of
an inch thick over the flood plain of Egypt.

Flood plains may consist of a thin spread of alluvium over the flat rock floor
of a valley which is being widened by the lateral erosion of a graded stream
(Fig. 60). Flood-plain deposits of great thickness may be built by aggrading
rivers even in valleys whose rock floors have never been thus widened.

A cross section of a flood plain shows that it is highest next the river,
sloping gradually thence to the valley sides. These wide natural embankments
are due to the fact that the river deposit is heavier near the bank, where the
velocity of the silt-laden channel current is first checked by contact with the
slower-moving overflow.

Thus banked off from the stream, the outer portions of a flood plain are often
ill-drained and swampy, and here vegetal deposits, such as peat, may be
interbedded with river silts.

A map of a wide flood plain, such as that of the Mississippi or the Missouri
(Fig. 77), shows that the courses of the tributaries on entering it are
deflected downstream. Why?

The aggrading streams by which flood plains are constructed gradually build
their immediate banks and beds to higher and higher levels, and therefore find
it easy at times of great floods to break their natural embankments and take
new courses over the plain. In this way they aggrade each portion of it in turn
by means of their shifting channels,

BRAIDED CHANNELS. A river actively engaged in aggrading its valley with coarse
waste builds a flood plain of comparatively steep gradient and often flows down
it in a fairly direct course and through a network of braided channels. From
time to time a channel becomes choked with waste, and the water no longer
finding room in it breaks out and cuts and builds itself a new way which
reunites down valley with the other channels. Thus there becomes established a
network of ever-changing channels inclosing low islands of sand and gravel.

TERRACES. While aggrading streams thus tend to shift their channels, degrading
streams, on the contrary, become more and more deeply intrenched in their
valleys. It often occurs that a stream, after having built a flood plain,
ceases to aggrade its bed because of a lessened load or for other reasons, such
as an uplift of the region, and begins instead to degrade it. It leaves the
original flood plain out of reach of even the highest floods. When again it
reaches grade at a lower level it produces a new flood plain by lateral erosion
in the older deposits, remnants of which stand as terraces on one or both sides
of the valley. In this way a valley may be lined with a succession of terraces
at different levels, each level representing an abandoned flood plain.

MEANDERS. Valleys aggraded with fine waste form well-nigh level plains over
which streams wind from side to side of a direct course in symmetric bends
known as meanders, from the name of a winding river of Asia Minor. The giant
Mississippi has developed meanders with a radius of one and one half miles, but
a little creek may display on its meadow as perfect curves only a rod or so in
radius. On the flood plain of either river or creek we may find examples of the
successive stages in the development of the meander, from its beginning in the
slight initial bend sufficient to deflect the current against the outer side.
Eroding here and depositing on the inner side of the bend, it gradually reaches
first the open bend whose width and length are not far from equal, and later
that of the horseshoe meander whose diameter transverse to the course of the
stream is much greater than that parallel with it. Little by little the neck of
land projecting into the bend is narrowed, until at last it is cut through and
a "cut-off" is established. The old channel is now silted up at both ends and
becomes a crescentic lagoon, or oxbow lake, which fills gradually to an
arc-shaped shallow depression.

FLOOD PLAINS CHARACTERISTIC OF MATURE RIVERS. On reaching grade a stream planes
a flat floor for its continually widening valley. Ever cutting on the outer
bank of its curves, it deposits on the inner bank scroll-like flood-plain
patches. For a while the valley bluffs do not give its growing meanders room to
develop to their normal size, but as planation goes on, the bluffs are driven
back to the full width of the meander belt and still later to a width which
gives room for broad stretches of flood plain on either side.

Usually a river first attains grade near its mouth, and here first sinks its
bed to near baselevel. Extending its graded course upstream by cutting away
barrier after barrier, it comes to have a widened and mature valley over its
lower course, while its young headwaters are still busily eroding their beds.
Its ungraded branches may thus bring down to its lower course more waste than
it is competent to carry on to the sea, and here it aggrades its bed and builds
a flood plain in order to gain a steeper gradient and velocity enough to
transport its load.

As maturity is past and the relief of the land is lessened, a smaller and
smaller load of waste is delivered to the river. It now has energy to spare and
again degrades its valley, excavating its former flood plains and leaving them
in terraces on either side, and at last in its old age sweeping them away.

ALLUVIAL CONES AND FANS. In hilly and mountainous countries one often sees on a
valley side a conical or fan-shaped deposit of waste at the mouth of a lateral
stream. The cause is obvious: the young branch has not been able as yet to wear
its bed to accordant level with the already deepened valley of the master
stream. It therefore builds its bed to grade at the point of juncture by
depositing here its load of waste,â€”a load too heavy to be carried along the
more gentle profile of the trunk valley.

Where rivers descend from a mountainous region upon the plain they may build
alluvial fans of exceedingly gentle slope. Thus the rivers of the western side
of the Sierra Nevada Mountains have spread fans with a radius of as much as
forty miles and a slope too slight to be detected without instruments, where
they leave the rock-cut canyons in the mountains and descend upon the broad
central valley of California.

As a river flows over its fan it commonly divides into a branchwork of shifting
channels called DISTRIBUTARIES, since they lead off the water from the main
stream. In this way each part of the fan is aggraded and its symmetric form is
preserved.

PIEDMONT PLAINS. Mountain streams may build their confluent fans into
widespread piedmont (foot of the mountain) alluvial plains. These are
especially characteristic of arid lands, where the streams wither as they flow
out upon the thirsty lowlands and are therefore compelled to lay down a large
portion of their load. In humid climates mountain-born streams are usually
competent to carry their loads of waste on to the sea, and have energy to spare
to cut the lower mountain slopes into foothills. In arid regions foothills are
commonly absent and the ranges rise, as from pedestals, above broad, sloping
plains of stream-laid waste.

THE HIGH PLAINS. The rivers which flow eastward from the Rocky Mountains have
united their fans in a continuous sheet of waste which stretches forward from
the base of the mountains for hundreds of miles and in places is five hundred
feet thick (Fig. 80). That the deposit was made in ancient times on land and
not in the sea is proved by the remains which it contains of land animals and
plants of species now extinct. That it was laid by rivers and not by
fresh-water lakes is shown by its structure. Wide stretches of flat-lying,
clays and sands are interrupted by long, narrow belts of gravel which mark the
channels of the ancient streams. Gravels, and sands are often cross bedded, and
their well worn pebbles may be identified with the rocks of the mountains.
After building this sheet of waste the streams ceased to aggrade and began the
work of destruction. Large uneroded remnants, their surfaces flat as a floor,
remain as the High Plains of western Kansas and Nebraska.

RIVER DEPOSITS IN SUBSIDING TROUGHS. To a geologist the most important river
deposits are those which gather in areas of gradual subsidence; they are often
of vast extent and immense thickness, and such deposits of past geological ages
have not infrequently been preserved, with all their records of the times in
which they were built, by being carried below the level of the sea, to be
brought to light by a later uplift. On the other hand, river deposits which
remain above baselevels of erosion are swept away comparatively soon.

THE GREAT VALLEY OF CALIFORNIA is a monotonously level plain of great
fertility, four hundred miles in length and fifty miles in average width, built
of waste swept down by streams from the mountain ranges which inclose it,â€”the
Sierra Nevada on the east and the Coast Range on the west. On the waste slopes
at the foot of the bordering hills coarse gravels and even bowlders are left,
while over the interior the slow-flowing streams at times of flood spread wide
sheets of silt. Organic deposits are now forming by the decay of vegetation in
swampy tule (reed) lands and in shallow lakes which occupy depressions left by
the aggrading streams.

Deep borings show that this great trough is filled to a depth of at least two
thousand feet below sea level with recent unconsolidated sands and silts
containing logs of wood and fresh- water shells. These are land deposits, and
the absence of any marine deposits among them proves that the region has not
been invaded by the sea since the accumulation began. It has therefore been
slowly subsiding and its streams, although continually carried below grade,
have yet been able to aggrade the surface as rapidly as the region sank, and
have maintained it, as at present, slightly above sea level.

THE INDO-GANGETIC PLAIN, spread by the Brahmaputra, the Ganges, and the Indus
river systems, stretches for sixteen hundred miles along the southern base of
the Himalaya Mountains and occupies an area of three hundred thousand square
miles (Fig.342). It consists of the flood plains of the master streams and the
confluent fans of the tributaries which issue from the mountains on the north.
Large areas are subject to overflow each season of flood, and still larger
tracts mark abandoned flood plains below which the rivers have now cut their
beds. The plain is built of far- stretching beds of clay, penetrated by streaks
of sand, and also of gravel near the mountains. Beds of impure peat occur in
it, and it contains fresh-water shells and the bones of land animals of species
now living in northern India. At Lucknow an artesian well was sunk to one
thousand feet below sea level without reaching the bottom of these river-laid
sands and silts, proving a slow subsidence with which the aggrading rivers have
kept pace.

WARPED VALLEYS. It is not necessary that an area should sink below sea level in
order to be filled with stream-swept waste. High valleys among growing mountain
ranges may suffer warping, or may be blockaded by rising mountain folds athwart
them. Where the deformation is rapid enough, the river may be ponded and the
valley filled with lake-laid sediments. Even when the river is able to maintain
its right of way it may yet have its declivity so lessened that it is compelled
to aggrade its course continually, filling the valley with river deposits which
may grow to an enormous thickness.

Behind the outer ranges of the Himalaya Mountains lie several waste-filled
valleys, the largest of which are Kashmir and Nepal, the former being an
alluvial plain about as large as the state of Delaware. The rivers which drain
these plains have already cut down their outlet gorges sufficiently to begin
the task of the removal of the broad accumulations which they have brought in
from the surrounding mountains. Their present flood plains lie as much as some
hundreds of feet below wide alluvial terraces which mark their former levels.
Indeed, the horizontal beds of the Hundes Valley have been trenched to the
depth of nearly three thousand feet by the Sutlej River. These deposits are
recent or subrecent, for there have been found at various levels the remains of
land plants and land and fresh-water shells, and in some the bones of such
animals as the hyena and the goat, of species or of genera now living. Such
soft deposits cannot be expected to endure through any considerable length of
future time the rapid erosion to which their great height above the level of
the sea will subject them.

CHARACTERISTICS OF RIVER DEPOSITS. The examples just cited teach clearly the
characteristic features of extensive river deposits. These deposits consist of
broad, flat-lying sheets of clay and fine sand left by the overflow at time of
flood, and traversed here and there by long, narrow strips of coarse,
cross-bedded sands and gravels thrown down by the swifter currents of the
shifting channels. Occasional beds of muck mark the sites of shallow lakelets
or fresh-water swamps. The various strata also contain some remains of the
countless myriads of animals and plants which live upon the surface of the
plain as it is in process of building. River shells such as the mussel, land
shells such as those of snails, the bones of fishes and of such land animals as
suffer drowning at times of flood or are mired in swampy places, logs of wood,
and the stems and leaves of plants are examples of the variety of the remains
of land and fresh-water organisms which are entombed in river deposits and
sealed away as a record of the life of the time, and as proof that the deposits
were laid by streams and not beneath the sea.  

### BASIN DEPOSITS

DEPOSITS IN DRY BASINS. On desert areas without outlet to the sea, as on the
Great Basin of the United States and the deserts of central Asia, stream-swept
waste accumulates indefinitely. The rivers of the surrounding mountains, fed by
the rains and melting snows of these comparatively moist elevations, dry and
soak away as they come down upon the arid plains. They are compelled to lay
aside their entire load of waste eroded from the mountain valleys, in fans
which grow to enormous size, reaching in some instances thousands of feet in
thickness.

The monotonous levels of Turkestan include vast alluvial tracts now in process
of building by the floods of the frequently shifting channels of the Oxus and
other rivers of the region. For about seven hundred miles from its mouth in
Aral Lake the Oxus receives no tributaries, since even the larger branches of
its system are lost in a network of distributaries and choked with desert sands
before they reach their master stream. These aggrading rivers, which have
channels but no valleys, spread their muddy floodsâ€”which in the case of the
Oxus sometimes equal the average volume of the Mississippiâ€”far and wide over
the plain, washing the bases of the desert dunes.

PLAYAS. In arid interior basins the central depressions may be occupied by
playas,â€”plains of fine mud washed forward from the margins. In the wet season
the playa is covered with a thin sheet of muddy water, a playa lake, supplied
usually by some stream at flood. In the dry season the lake evaporates, the
river which fed it retreats, and there is left to view a hard, smooth, level
floor of sun-baked and sun-cracked yellow clay utterly devoid of vegetation.

In the Black Rock desert of Nevada a playa lake spreads over an area fifty
miles long and twenty miles wide. In summer it disappears; the Quinn River,
which feeds it, shrinks back one hundred miles toward its source, leaving an
absolutely barren floor of clay, level as the sea.
