=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

pfft - PDF From Formatted Text

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  pfft [OPTION...] FILENAME... - produce a PDF from each FILENAME

Processes Markdown file FILENAME and outputs a PDF.
Visit https://github.com/cxw42/pfft for more information.

=head1 OPTIONS

=head2 Help Options

=over

=item -h, --help

Show help options

=back

=head2 Application Options

=over

=item -V, --version

Display version number

=item -v, --verbose

Verbosity.  Can be given up to five times, each time increasing verbosity.

=item -q, --quiet

Turn off output.  If both C<-q> and C<-v> are given, the C<-q> wins, and
messages are not printed.

=item -R, --reader=READER

Which reader to use

=item --ro=NAME=VALUE

Set a reader option

=item -o, --output=FILENAME

Output filename (provided only one input filename is given)

=item -W, --writer=WRITER

Which writer to use

=item --wo=NAME=VALUE

Set a writer option

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over

=item C<GST_DEBUG>

This controls the verbosity.  Set

    GST_DEBUG='pfft:X'

to set verbosity to level C<X>.  C<X=0> means no messages (like C<-q>), and
C<X=9> means everything (like giving C<-v> five or more times).

=back

=head1 FILES

The default output filename is the same as the input filename, but with the
extension changed to C<.pdf>.

If you only specify one input filename on the command line, you can give the
C<-o> option to set the output filename.

=head1 EXAMPLES

    $ pfft foo.md                           # produces foo.pdf
    $ GST_DEBUG='pfft:9' pfft -v foo.md     # _lots_ of debug output!

=head1 AUTHOR

Christopher White C<< <cxwembedded@gmail.com> >>.

=head1 REPORTING BUGS

Please use the GitHub bug tracker at L<https://github.com/cxw42/pfft/issues>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2020, Christopher White.  All rights reserved.

SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

=over

=item 1.

Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

=item 2.

Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

=item 3.

Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
this software without specific prior written permission.

=back

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

=head2 LGPL portions

Files in the C<src/logging> directory in the source distribution are
licensed LGPL 2.1 or later (SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-2.1-or-later).
They include functions that are:
Copyright (c) 2020 Christopher White;
Copyright (C) 1999,2000 Erik Walthinsen <omega@cse.ogi.edu>;
Copyright 2000 Red Hat, Inc.; or
Copyright (C) 1994-2018 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

The full source of those portions is available to be copied from
L<https://github.com/cxw42/pfft/tree/master/src/logging>.

=head2 Other libraries used

=head3 md4c

From L<https://github.com/mity/md4c>.  Copyright © 2016-2020 Martin Mitáš.
Licensed MIT.

=head3 Regexp::Common

From L<https://metacpan.org/pod/release/ABIGAIL/Regexp-Common-2017060201/lib/Regexp/Common.pm>.
Copyright (c) 2001 - 2017, Damian Conway and Abigail.  Licensed BSD-3-Clause.

=head1 SEE ALSO

pandoc(1), pdflatex(1) --- much more capable, but much heavier.

=cut
